1_AWS_Cloud9/README.md, before:

# Module 1: Preparing your AWS Cloud 9 Development Environment

AWS Cloud9 is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) that lets you write, run, and debug your code with just a browser. 

> **Note**: If you choose to use your laptop as your development environment, you can skip this module.

## Create Cloud9 Environment
In this section, we will create a AWS Cloud9 (C9) environment and configure it to access AWS resources.

1. Open the [AWS Cloud9 console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/)

2. Choose **Ireland** region. Please ensure you are in the correct AWS region.

  	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image_c9.png)

3. Click **Create Environment**.

4. Provide a name, **reinvent-calorie-tracker-workshop** and Click **Next Step**.

5. Under **Environmnent Settings**, choose **Create a new instance for environment (EC2)** and **Instance type** as **m4.large**.

  	![Cloud9 Instance](../images/image-c9-instance.png)

6. Click **Next Step** and click **Create Environment**. This will take 3-5 minutes to create the environment.

7. Once your environment is ready, you will see the following screen. The top half is the welcome page and code editor window. And the bottom half is your terminal window.

  	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-view.png)


8. Attach an IAM role to your Cloud9 EC2 instance.
	> IAM roles for EC2 make it easier for your applications to make API requests securely from an instance because they do not require you to manage AWS security credentials that the applications use.
	
    1. Go to EC2 console. Make sure you are in **Ireland** region. 
    2. Click **Instances** on the left navigation bar. 
    3. Search for the keyword `aws-cloud9-reinvent-calorie-tracker-workshop-` and select the instance. Under **Actions** | **Instance Settings** | select **Attach or Replace IAM Role**.

		![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-ec2-instance.png)

    4. Search for the IAM Role with keyword `AWSCloud9InstanceProfile` and select the role that appears in the search result. Click **Apply**.

    	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-role.png)

9. Go to your Cloud9 IDE and within the terminal window, type the following S3 list command to view the S3 buckets in your region. If you are able to see the list of S3 buckets, it means your Cloud9 envrionment has been successfully setup with right permission required for this workshop.
	```
	aws s3 ls --region eu-west-1
	```

    ![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-s3.png)

10. Verify the NodeJS version via the Cloud9 terminal.

	```
	$ node -v
	v6.14.4
	```

	Update the node.js version, if you are running < 8
	
	```
	$ nvm install 8
	Now using node v8.12.0 (npm v6.4.1)
	```

	After the upgrade, verify the NodeJS version.
	
	```
	$ node -v
	v8.13.0
	```

## Clone the project

Within your AWS Cloud9 environment, clone the workshop GitHub repo.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/aws-samples/aws-appsync-calorie-tracker-workshop.git
$ cd aws-appsync-calorie-tracker-workshop
```

  ![Folder Structure](../images/image_c9_folder_structure.png)

---

**Congratulations!!!** You have completed setting up your AWS Cloud9 environment and have cloned the project. In the next section, you will [configure AppSync](../2_APPSYNC/README.md)

[Go back to the home page](../README.md)

Commit message:

add instructions to modify vol size on Cloud9 inst

1_AWS_Cloud9/README.md, after:

# Module 1: Preparing your AWS Cloud 9 Development Environment

AWS Cloud9 is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) that lets you write, run, and debug your code with just a browser. 

> **Note**: If you choose to use your laptop as your development environment, you can skip this module.

## Create Cloud9 Environment
In this section, we will create a AWS Cloud9 (C9) environment and configure it to access AWS resources.

1. Open the [AWS Cloud9 console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/)

2. Choose **Ireland** region. Please ensure you are in the correct AWS region.

  	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image_c9.png)

3. Click **Create Environment**.

4. Provide a name, **reinvent-calorie-tracker-workshop** and Click **Next Step**.

5. Under **Environmnent Settings**, choose **Create a new instance for environment (EC2)** and **Instance type** as **m4.large**.

  	![Cloud9 Instance](../images/image-c9-instance.png)

6. Click **Next Step** and click **Create Environment**. This will take 3-5 minutes to create the environment.

7. Once your environment is ready, you will see the following screen. The top half is the welcome page and code editor window. And the bottom half is your terminal window.

  	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-view.png)


8. Attach an IAM role to your Cloud9 EC2 instance.
	> IAM roles for EC2 make it easier for your applications to make API requests securely from an instance because they do not require you to manage AWS security credentials that the applications use.
	
    1. Go to EC2 console. Make sure you are in **Ireland** region. 
    2. Click **Instances** on the left navigation bar. 
    3. Search for the keyword `aws-cloud9-reinvent-calorie-tracker-workshop-` and select the instance. Under **Actions** | **Instance Settings** | select **Attach or Replace IAM Role**.

		![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-ec2-instance.png)

    4. Search for the IAM Role with keyword `AWSCloud9InstanceProfile` and select the role that appears in the search result. Click **Apply**.

    	![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-role.png)

9. Increase the size of the Cloud9 EC2 instance root volume.
	> To ensure we do not run out of disk space when developing we need to incfrease teh root volume size.

	1. Go to EC2 console. Make sure you are in **Ireland** region. 
    2. Click **Instances** on the left navigation bar. 
    3. Search for the keyword `aws-cloud9-reinvent-calorie-tracker-workshop-` and select the instance.
	4. Select the **Storge** tab and click the volume link in the **Volume ID** column
	5. Check the volume is selected then select **Actions then Modify Volume**
	6. Change the size from the default value to **20** and click the **Modify** button
	7. Navigate back to the instance as per points 1 to 3.
	8. Once selected click **Instance State** button then select **Reboot**


10. Go to your Cloud9 IDE and within the terminal window, type the following S3 list command to view the S3 buckets in your region. If you are able to see the list of S3 buckets, it means your Cloud9 envrionment has been successfully setup with right permission required for this workshop.
	```
	aws s3 ls --region eu-west-1
	```

    ![Cloud9 Env](../images/image-c9-s3.png)

11. Verify the NodeJS version via the Cloud9 terminal.

	```
	$ node -v
	v6.14.4
	```

	Update the node.js version, if you are running < 8
	
	```
	$ nvm install 8
	Now using node v8.12.0 (npm v6.4.1)
	```

	After the upgrade, verify the NodeJS version.
	
	```
	$ node -v
	v8.13.0
	```

## Clone the project

Within your AWS Cloud9 environment, clone the workshop GitHub repo.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/aws-samples/aws-appsync-calorie-tracker-workshop.git
$ cd aws-appsync-calorie-tracker-workshop
```

  ![Folder Structure](../images/image_c9_folder_structure.png)

---

**Congratulations!!!** You have completed setting up your AWS Cloud9 environment and have cloned the project. In the next section, you will [configure AppSync](../2_APPSYNC/README.md)

[Go back to the home page](../README.md)
